Partial data (#467)
Materials-Consortia/OPTIMADE: optimade.rst

:filter:`filter=_exmpl1_band_gap<2.0 OR _exmpl2_band_gap<2.5`

Transmission of large property values
-------------------------------------

A property value may be too large to fit in a single response.
OPTIMADE provides a mechanism for a client to handle such properties by fetching them in separate series of requests.

In this case, the response to the initial query gives the value :val:`null` for the property.
A list of one or more data URLs together with their respective partial data formats are given in the response.
How this list is provided is response format-dependent.

> For the JSON response format, see the description of the :field:`partial_data_urls` field inside :field:`meta` inside :field:`data` in the section `JSON Response Schema: Common Fields`_.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For the JSON response format, see the description of the :field:`partial_data_urls` field, nested under :field:`data` and then :field:`meta`, in the section `JSON Response Schema: Common Fields`_.
```

> For the JSON response format, see the description of the :field:`partial_data_urls` field, nested under :field:`data` and then :field:`meta`, in the section `JSON Response Schema: Common Fields`_.

Author: ```suggestion
For the JSON response format, see the description of the :field:`partial_data_links` field, nested under :field:`data` and then :field:`meta`, in the section `JSON Response Schema: Common Fields`_.
```

The default partial data format is named "jsonlines" and is described in the Appendix `OPTIMADE JSON lines partial data format`_.
An implementation SHOULD always include this format as one of alternative partial data formats provided for a property that has been omitted from the response to the initial query.
Implementations MAY provide links to their own non-standard formats, but non-standard format names MUST be prefixed by a database-provider-specific prefix.

> Below follows an example of the data and meta parts in a response using the JSON response format that communicates that the property value has been omitted from the response, with three different URLs for different partial data formats provided.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Below follows an example of the :field:`data` and :field:`meta` parts of a response using the JSON response format that communicates that the property value has been omitted from the response, with three different URLs for different partial data formats provided.
```

> Below follows an example of the :field:`data` and :field:`meta` parts of a response using the JSON response format that communicates that the property value has been omitted from the response, with three different URLs for different partial data formats provided.

Author: ```suggestion
Below follows an example of the :field:`data` and :field:`meta` parts of a response using the JSON response format that communicates that the property value has been omitted from the response, with three different links for different partial data formats provided.
```

.. code:: jsonc
   {
       // ...
       "data": {
          "type": "structures",
          "id": "2345678",
          "attributes": {
              "a": null
          }
       }

>        "meta": {

Reviewer: This indentation is incorrect, no? From the wording it is implied that `meta` is nested under `data`

>            "partial_data_urls": {

Author: ```suggestion
           "partial_data_links": {
```

           "partial_data_urls": {
               "a": [
                   {
                       "format": "jsonlines",

>                        "url": "https://example.org/optimade/v1.2/extensions/partial_data/structures/2345678/a/default_format"

Reviewer: Probably should should be a JSON:API links object

Reviewer: i.e., allow `"url": {'href': blah}` rather than just a string

Author: I've done some edits. The example should be OK to be a string; the field definition now defines the field as a JSON API link.

>                  "url": "https://example.org/optimade/v1.2/extensions/partial_data/structures/2345678/a/default_format"
>                },
>                {
>                  "format": "_exmpl_bzip2_jsonlines",
>                  "url": "https://db.example.org/assets/partial_values/structures/2345678/a/bzip2_format"
>                },
>                {
>                  "format": "_exmpl_hdf5",
>                  "url": "https://cloud.example.org/ACCHSORJGIHWOSJZG"

Author: ```suggestion
                 "link": "https://example.org/optimade/v1.2/extensions/partial_data/structures/2345678/a/default_format"
               },
               {
                 "format": "_exmpl_bzip2_jsonlines",
                 "link": "https://db.example.org/assets/partial_values/structures/2345678/a/bzip2_format"
               },
               {
                 "format": "_exmpl_hdf5",
                 "link": "https://cloud.example.org/ACCHSORJGIHWOSJZG"
```

>    {
>        // ...
>        "data": {
>           "type": "structures",
>           "id": "2345678",
>           "attributes": {
>               "a": null
>           }
>        }
>        "meta": {
>            "partial_data_urls": {
>                "a": [
>                    {
>                        "format": "jsonlines",
>                        "url": "https://example.org/optimade/v1.2/extensions/partial_data/structures/2345678/a/default_format"
>                    },
>                    {
>                        "format": "_exmpl_bzip2_jsonlines",
>                        "url": "https://db.example.org/assets/partial_values/structures/2345678/a/bzip2_format"
>                    },
>                    {
>                        "format": "_exmpl_hdf5",
>                        "url": "https://cloud.example.org/ACCHSORJGIHWOSJZG"
>                    }
>                ]
>            }
>        }
>        // ...
>    }

Author: ```suggestion
     {
       // ...
       "data": {
         "type": "structures",
         "id": "2345678",
         "attributes": {
             "a": null
         }
         "meta": {
           "partial_data_urls": {
             "a": [
               {
                 "format": "jsonlines",
                 "url": "https://example.org/optimade/v1.2/extensions/partial_data/structures/2345678/a/default_format"
               },
               {
                 "format": "_exmpl_bzip2_jsonlines",
                 "url": "https://db.example.org/assets/partial_values/structures/2345678/a/bzip2_format"
               },
               {
                 "format": "_exmpl_hdf5",
                 "url": "https://cloud.example.org/ACCHSORJGIHWOSJZG"
               }
             ]
           }
         }               
       }
     // ...
   }
```

:filter:`filter=_exmpl1_band_gap<2.0 OR _exmpl2_band_gap<2.5`

Transmission of large property values
-------------------------------------

A property value may be too large to fit in a single response.

> OPTIMADE provides a mechanism for a client to handle such properties by fetching them in separate series of requests.

Reviewer 2: > Is your suggestion button broken? ;-)

I could say :sweat_smile: I was not sure how to propose addition of new lines. Thanks.

- **data**: The schema of this value varies by endpoint, it can be either a *single* `JSON API resource object <http://jsonapi.org/format/1.0/#document-resource-objects>`__ or a *list* of JSON API resource objects.
  Every resource object needs the :field:`type` and :field:`id` fields, and its attributes (described in section `API Endpoints`_) need to be in a dictionary corresponding to the :field:`attributes` field.

  The :field:`data` field MAY also contain a :field:`meta` field with the following keys:

>   - **property_metadata**: an object containing per-entry and per-property metadata.

Reviewer 2: This completely evaded me on the first read: this PR introduces property metadata as well.

Reviewer 2: But then, have not we decided to put them in `"meta"` of the top level? Moreover, how `"data"` can contain keys if it is a list, as written on the line 593?

    The keys are the names of the fields in :field:`attributes` for which metadata is available.
    The values belonging to these keys are dictionaries containing the relevant metadata fields.

>   - **partial_data_urls**: an object used to list URL:s which can be used to fetch data that has been omitted from the :field:`data` part of the response.

Reviewer 3: An example here would be very helpful. Or shall we make a link to the partial_data section that contains such example?

    The keys are the names of the fields in :field:`attributes` for which partial data URLs are available.
    Each value is a list of items that MUST have the following keys:

    - **format**: String.
      A name of the format provided via this URL.
      One of the items SHOULD be "json lines", which refers to the format in `OPTIMADE JSON lines partial data format`_.

    - **url**: String.
      The URL from which the data can be fetched.

> 

Author: Isn't it just adding unnecessary bulk length to the specification to add requirements like this? Is there anything to gain from saying that this list MUST contain at least one element, instead of clients just ignoring when they get an empty list which would be the normal assumption?

Also, after the last changes (which you of course didn't see when making this comment), IMO, the requirement that one SHOULD be "jsonlines" fits better in the new section on partial data; since this most just covers the JSON response format schema.

- **data**: The schema of this value varies by endpoint, it can be either a *single* `JSON API resource object <http://jsonapi.org/format/1.0/#document-resource-objects>`__ or a *list* of JSON API resource objects.
  Every resource object needs the :field:`type` and :field:`id` fields, and its attributes (described in section `API Endpoints`_) need to be in a dictionary corresponding to the :field:`attributes` field.

>   The :field:`data` field MAY also contain a :field:`meta` field with the following keys:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  Every resource object MAY also contain a :field:`meta` field with the following keys:
```
`data` may not be an object, but a list. The sentence above handles that nicely, I suggest extending the same here.

>   - **partial_data_urls**: an object used to list URLs which can be used to fetch data that has been omitted from the :field:`data` part of the response.

Author: ```suggestion
  - **partial_data_links**: an object used to list URLs which can be used to fetch data that has been omitted from the :field:`data` part of the response.
```

    The keys are the names of the fields in :field:`attributes` for which partial data URLs are available.
    Each value is a list of items that MUST have the following keys:

    - **format**: String.
      A name of the format provided via this URL.
      One of the items SHOULD be "jsonlines", which refers to the format in `OPTIMADE JSON lines partial data format`_.

>     - **url**: String.

Author: ```suggestion
    - **link**: String.
```

      The URL from which the data can be fetched.

>       There is no requirement on the syntax or format of the URL.

Reviewer: Storing this under `meta` means that this is not directly queryable, correct? Is there a way to query for fields that are too big? An JSON:API-based alternative (apologies if this was already discussed...) could be to include these links as `relationships` with `links`, with otherwise the same descriptions.

Author: I don't think we discussed solving it with relationships. But, the idea has been that the "too big to fit" handling lives completely on the implementation level as a mechanism mostly orthogonal to the rest of OPTIMADE. It is specifically designed as a way for a client to get data that, if it had fitted, would have been inlined in the response. What is "large" and "not large" isn't "data", doesn't belong in the database and thus cannot be queried. Arguably it could change at a moment notice if the server is trying to keep response data down.

>       The URL from which the data can be fetched.
>       There is no requirement on the syntax or format of the URL.

Author: ```suggestion
      A `JSON API link <http://jsonapi.org/format/1.0/#document-links>`__ that points to a location from which the data can be fetched.
      There is no requirement on the syntax or format for the link URL.
```

>   - **partial_data_links**: an object used to list URLs which can be used to fetch data that has been omitted from the :field:`data` part of the response.
>     The keys are the names of the fields in :field:`attributes` for which partial data URLs are available.
>     Each value is a list of items that MUST have the following keys:
> 
>     - **format**: String.
>       A name of the format provided via this URL.
>       One of the items SHOULD be "jsonlines", which refers to the format in `OPTIMADE JSON lines partial data format`_.
> 
>     - **link**: String.
>       A `JSON API link <http://jsonapi.org/format/1.0/#document-links>`__ that points to a location from which the omitted data can be fetched.
>       There is no requirement on the syntax or format for the link URL.
> 
>     For more information about the mechanism to transmit large property values, including an example of the format of :field:`partial_data_links`, see `Transmission of large property values`_.

Author: ```suggestion
  - **partial_data_links**: an object used to list links which can be used to fetch data that has been omitted from the :field:`data` part of the response.
    The keys are the names of the fields in :field:`attributes` for which partial data links are available.
    Each value is a list of items that MUST have the following keys:

    - **format**: String.
      A name of the format provided via this link.
      One of the items SHOULD be "jsonlines", which refers to the format in `OPTIMADE JSON lines partial data format`_.

    - **link**: String.
      A `JSON API link <http://jsonapi.org/format/1.0/#document-links>`__ that points to a location from which the omitted data can be fetched.
      There is no requirement on the syntax or format for the link URL.

    For more information about the mechanism to transmit large property values, including an example of the format of :field:`partial_data_links`, see `Transmission of large property values`_.
```

- **data**: The schema of this value varies by endpoint, it can be either a *single* `JSON API resource object <http://jsonapi.org/format/1.0/#document-resource-objects>`__ or a *list* of JSON API resource objects.
  Every resource object needs the :field:`type` and :field:`id` fields, and its attributes (described in section `API Endpoints`_) need to be in a dictionary corresponding to the :field:`attributes` field.

  Every resource object MAY also contain a :field:`meta` field with the following keys:

  - **partial_data_links**: an object used to list links which can be used to fetch data that has been omitted from the :field:`data` part of the response.
    The keys are the names of the fields in :field:`attributes` for which partial data links are available.
    Each value is a list of items that MUST have the following keys:

    - **format**: String.
      A name of the format provided via this link.
      One of the items SHOULD be "jsonlines", which refers to the format in `OPTIMADE JSON lines partial data format`_.

    - **link**: String.

>       A `JSON API link <http://jsonapi.org/format/1.0/#document-links>`__ that points to a location from which the omitted data can be fetched.

Author: But, eh, didn't you approve #474? This is using the exact same formulation in the same context (describing a link inside JSON API-specific output). A "JSON API link" is a plain string URL or an "JSON API link object". (Yeah, you are excused if you find the terminology confusing, but it is the terms the JSON API specification defines.)

>       A `JSON API link <http://jsonapi.org/format/1.0/#document-links>`__ that points to a location from which the omitted data can be fetched.

Reviewer 2: Right, I did approve #474, but having re-read what JSON API specification says about links and link objects I find the description confusing and cannot see any value the reference to JSON API brings here. This should not block the PR, just raising a question whether an update to #474 is needed.

>       A `JSON API link <http://jsonapi.org/format/1.0/#document-links>`__ that points to a location from which the omitted data can be fetched.

Author: Ok, I'll click resolve here then (to simplify the already lengthy view); please take the discussion to #474. It would be good if you can clarify how you read the JSON:API specification differently than @ml-evs and me. IMO "JSON:API link" is the only way to express what we already have described in many places.

  - **self**: the entry's URL

- **meta**: a `JSON API meta object <https://jsonapi.org/format/1.0/#document-meta>`__ that is used to communicate metadata.

>   See `JSON Response Schema: Common Fields`_ for more information about this field.

Reviewer 4: I think I came across another commit which removed part of the definition of the metadata fields. So it looked like you forgot this piece, which is why I mentioned it.  
Either both should be in or both should be out.

>   See `JSON Response Schema: Common Fields`_ for more information about this field.

Author: Earlier I indeed removed a segment here that defined the `property_metadata` subkey of `meta`, which I agree belong better in #463. But, the segment you have marked now defines the `meta` superkey we need for the `partial_data_links` subkey. 

I'm confused over what you are asking for. Are you saying we absolutely should *not* mention `meta` with a link to 'JSON Response Schema: Common Fields' that defines `meta -> partial_data_links`; despite that with this PR that key is an absolutely vital part of the 'Entry Listing JSON Response Schema'?

Appendices
==========

OPTIMADE JSON lines partial data format
---------------------------------------
The OPTIMADE JSON lines partial data format is a lightweight format for transmitting property data that are too large to fit in a single OPTIMADE response.
In this case, the usual OPTIMADE response gives the value :val:`null` for the property, and the per-entry metadata specifies a URL that can be used to fetch the missing data in this format.
See `Per-property metadata`_ for information on the per-entry and per-property metadata format.

> .. _slice object:

Reviewer 4: What is this line `.. _slice object:` supposed to do ?

Author: https://docutils.sourceforge.io/docs/ref/rst/restructuredtext.html#hyperlink-targets

The JSON Lines specification is used to transmit long array data in a "streaming JSON" way [... ref ...].
To aid the definition of the "json lines" format below, we first define a "slice object" to be a JSON object describing slices of arrays.
The dictionary has the following OPTIONAL fields:

- :field:`"start"`: Integer.
  The slice starts at the value with the given index (inclusive).
  The default is 0, i.e., the value at the start of the array.
- :field:`"stop"`

>   The slice ends at the value with the given index (inclusive).

Reviewer 4: Are you sure we want this to be inclusive ?
During the previous optimade meeting, we made it 1-based because we did not want to combine 0-based with inclusive. 
Or do we want to have a good excuse to switch to 1 based indexing in OPTIMADE 2.0 ?

Reviewer 2: Are you proposing to switch to 1-based indexing just for partial data, or in all OPTIMADE indexes? At least `assemblies` is also using indexes (0-based at the moment), and there could be more places.

Author: My recollection was that in one of our discussions we concluded that zero-based (since we use it in assemblies) and inclusive indexing is not a problem. Can you give some examples of what becomes unintuitive with this combination?

Reviewer 3: I can conform that 0-base indexing and inclusinve slice limits are not a problem. Viz. Perl:

```
# An array with 7 elements, indexed 0 through 6:                                                                             
@a = (10, 20, 30, 40, 50, 60, 70);

$\ = "\n"; # output the trailing "\n" when printing;                                                                         
$, = " "; # separate array components with spaces;                                                                           

print "The whole array, 7 elements                                 :", @a;
print "The first element, 0-th index                               :", $a[0];
print "A slice of three elements, staring with element 2 (index 1) :", @a[1..3];

@slice = @a[2..5];

print "\@slice = \@a[2..5], a slice of 4 elements staring at idx 2   :", @slice;
print "The first (index 0) element of the slice                    :", $slice[0];
print "The second (index 1) element of the slice                   :", $slice[1];
print "The last (index -1) element of the slice                    :", $slice[-1];

```
 outputs:

```
The whole array, 7 elements                                 : 10 20 30 40 50 60 70
The first element, 0-th index                               : 10
A slice of three elements, staring with element 2 (index 1) : 20 30 40
@slice = @a[2..5], a slice of 4 elements staring at idx 2   : 30 40 50 60
The first (index 0) element of the slice                    : 30
The second (index 1) element of the slice                   : 40
The last (index -1) element of the slice                    : 60
```

> - :field:`"stop"`
>   The slice ends at the value with the given index (inclusive).
>   The default is the last value of the array.

Author: ```suggestion
- :field:`"stop"`
  The slice ends at the value with the given index (inclusive).
  If omitted, the end of the slice is not specified.
  If the slice refers to what values of an array are included in a response, the client instead have to count the numbers it encounters.
  If the slice instead refers to a requested data range, an omitted :field:`stop` means the same as specifying the last index of the array. 
```

- :field:`"step"`
  The absolute difference in index between two subsequent values that are included in the slice.
  The default is 1, i.e., every value in the range indicated by :field:`start` and :field:`stop` is included in the slice.
  For example, a value of 2 denotes a slice of every second value in the array.

Furthermore, we also define the following special markers:

- The "end-of-data--marker" is this exact JSON: :val:`[["end"], ""]`.
- A "reference-marker" is this exact JSON: :val:`[["ref"], "URL"]`, where :val:`"URL"` is to be replaced with a URL being referenced.

> - A "next-marker" is this exact JSON: :val:`[["end"], "URK"]`, where :val:`"URL"` is to be replaced with the target URL for the next link.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- A "next-marker" is this exact JSON: :val:`[["end"], "URL"]`, where :val:`"URL"` is to be replaced with the target URL for the next link.
```

> - A "next-marker" is this exact JSON: :val:`[["end"], "URK"]`, where :val:`"URL"` is to be replaced with the target URL for the next link.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- A "next-marker" is this exact JSON: :val:`[["end"], "URL"]`, where :val:`"URL"` is to be replaced with the target URL for the next link.
```

These JSON markers have been deliberately designed as lists with items of mixed data types, and thus cannot be encountered inside the actual data of an OPTIMADE property.

> The full response MUST be valid `json lines <https://jsonlines.org/>`__ that adheres to the format:

Reviewer 2: What happens if any of the values contains a newline symbol?

Author: Can JSON data values contain newlines? Can you give an example of valid JSON that would have this issue?

Reviewer 5: JSON values (e.g. strings) can, but they are encoded as `\n`. 

E.g. in python:
```python
a = """b
c"""
import json
print(json.dumps(a))
```
returns `"b\nc"`

In addition, as a note, in JSON-lines one must put every JSON in a single request (e.g. in python, do not use `indent=xxx` as a parameter to json.dumps).

Reviewer 2: Oh right, I must have forgotten, newlines are escaped in JSON.

- The first line is a header object (defined below)
- The following lines are data lines adhering to the formats described below.

> - The final line is either an end-of-data--marker (indicating that there is no more data to be given), or a next-marker indicating that more data is available, which can be obtained by retriving data from the provided URL.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- The final line is either an end-of-data--marker (indicating that there is no more data to be given), or a next-marker indicating that more data is available, which can be obtained by retrieving data from the provided URL.
```

> - The final line is either an end-of-data--marker (indicating that there is no more data to be given), or a next-marker indicating that more data is available, which can be obtained by retriving data from the provided URL.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- The final line is either an end-of-data--marker (indicating that there is no more data to be given), or a next-marker indicating that more data is available, which can be obtained by retrieving data from the provided URL.
```

The first line MUST be a JSON object providing header information.
The header object MUST contain the key:

> - :field:`"format"`: String.

Reviewer 4: Do we still want to include information about which property is contained in the file and to which entry and database it belongs ?

Author: Ok, I've added optional fields for this now.

  A string either equal to :val:`"dense"` or :val:`"sparse"` to indicate whether the returned format is dense or sparse.

The header object MAY also contain the key:

> - :field:`"returned_range"`: Object.

Reviewer 4: Should this not be a list of objects, so a multidimensional array can be returned as well ?

Author: I think you are right, but, this is only relevant specifically for sparse data using multi-dimensional indexing (right?). So, I've updated the field to "returned_ranges" and describe this in the description.

  A `slice object`_ representing the range of data present in the response.
  Once the client has encountered an end-of-data--marker (defined below), any data not covered by the encountered slices are to be assigned the value :val:`null`.

>   If the format is `"dense"` and :field:`returned_range` is omitted, then the client MUST assume that the data is a continuous range of data from the start of the array up to the number of elements given until reaching the end-of-data--marker or next-marker (defined below).

Reviewer 4: I think we should make `returned_range` mandatory. In many cases, that will allow the client to preallocate memory so the processing of the file can be more efficient.

Author: While convenient for clients, in some cases where a data structure being processed where this information is not available it may be very expensive to derive this information. Databases that feel strongly that it always must be included are of course always allowed to include it.

Author: Since I see no +1:s and no reply here, I'm going to consider this resolved, until someone else chimes in.

Reviewer 4: I understand that for sparse data the range is not always known, so you can't return it in every case. Could we instead put a SHOULD or RECOMMANDED label on it ?

> - :field:`"returned_range"`: Object.
>   A `slice object`_ representing the range of data present in the response.
>   Once the client has encountered an end-of-data--marker (defined below), any data not covered by the encountered slices are to be assigned the value :val:`null`.
>   If the format is `"dense"` and :field:`returned_range` is omitted, then the client MUST assume that the data is a continuous range of data from the start of the array up to the number of elements given until reaching the end-of-data--marker or next-marker (defined below).

Author: ```suggestion
- :field:`"returned_ranges"`: Array of Object.
  For dense data and sparse data of one dimensional list properties, the array contains a single element which is a `slice object`_ representing the range of data present in the response.
  Once the client has encountered an end-of-data--marker (defined below), any data not covered by the encountered slices are to be assigned the value :val:`null`.
  If the format is `"dense"` and :field:`returned_range` is omitted, then the client MUST assume that the data is a continuous range of data from the start of the array up to the number of elements given until reaching the end-of-data--marker or next-marker (defined below).
  In the specific case of a hierarchy of list properties represented as a sparse multi-dimensional array, the field :field:`"returned_ranges" MAY be given.
  If given, it MUST contain one slice object per dimension of the multi-dimensional array, representing slices for each dimension that cover the data in the response.
```

- **Dense format:** In the dense partial data format, each data line reproduces one list item in the OPTIMADE list property being transmitted in JSON format.
  If OPTIMADE list properties are embedded inside the item, they can either be included in full or replaced with a reference-marker.
  If a list is replaced by a reference marker, the client MAY use the provided URL to obtain the list items, which is then also provided in the JSON lines partial data format.

- **Sparse format for one-dimensional list:** When the response sparsely communicates items for a one-dimensional OPTIMADE list property, each data line contains a JSON array on the format:

  - The first item is the index of the item provided.
  - The second item is a JSON representation of the item, on the same format as the lines in the dense format.
    In the same way as for the dense format, reference-markers are allowed for data that does not fit in the response.

- **Sparse format for multi-dimensional lists:** Specifically for the case that the OPTIMADE property represents a series of directly hierarchically embedded lists, the server MAY represent them using a sparse multi-dimensional format.

>   In this case, each data line contains a JSON array on the format:

Author: ```suggestion
  In this case, each data line contains a JSON array in the format of:
```

Examples
--------

An example of an OPTIMADE JSON-API response that contains a link to a partial data protocol URL:

.. code:: json
   {
       "data": {
          "type": "structures",
          "id": "2345678",
          "attributes": {
              "a": null
          }
       }
       "meta": {
           "partial_data_urls": {
               "a": [
                   {
                       "format": "plain-jsonlines",
                       "url": "https://example.db.org/assets/partial_values/structures/2345678/a/default_format"
                   },
                   {
                       "format": "bzip2-jsonlines",
                       "url": "https://example.db.org/assets/partial_values/structures/2345678/a/bzip2_format"
                   },
                   {
                       "format": "hdf5",
                       "url": "https://example.db.org/assets/partial_values/structures/2345678/a/hdf5"
                   }
               ]
           }
           "property_metadata": {
               "a": {
                   
               }
           }
       }
   }

An example of a dense response for a partial array data, scalar values:

.. code:: json

>     {"format": "dense", "returned_range": {"start": 10, "stop": 20, "step": 2}}

Author: ```suggestion
    {"format": "dense", "returned_ranges": [{"start": 10, "stop": 20, "step": 2}]}
```

    123
    345
    -12.6

>     [["next"], "https://example.db.org/value4"]

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    [["end"], "https://example.db.org/value4"]
```

Author: Why do you want to replace all next-markers with end markers? (And, if they are supposed to be end-markers, the second string is supposed to be empty.)

An example of a dense response for a partial array data, multidimensional array values:

.. code:: json

>     {"format": "dense", "returned_range": {"start": 10, "stop": 20, "step": 2}}

Author: ```suggestion
    {"format": "dense", "returned_ranges": [{"start": 10, "stop": 20, "step": 2}]}
```

    [[10,20,21], [30,40,50]]

>     [["ext"], "https://example.db.org/value2"]]

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    [["ref"], "https://example.db.org/value2"]]
```

Author: ```suggestion
    [["ext"], "https://example.db.org/value2"]
```

    [[11, 110], [["ref"], "https://example.db.org/value3"], [550, 333]]

>     [["next"], "https://example.db.org/value4"]

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    [["end"], "https://example.db.org/value4"]
```

An example of a sparse response for a partial array data with aggregated dimensions, single dimension array:

.. code:: json
    {"format": "sparse"}
    [3,5,19,  [10,20,21,30]]
    [30,15,9, [["ref"], "https://example.db.org/value1"]]

>     [["next"], "https://example.db.org/"]

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    [["end"], "https://example.db.org/"]
```

An example of a sparse response for a partial array data with aggregated dimensions, scalar values:
          
.. code:: json
    {"format": "sparse"}
    [3,5,19,  10]
    [30,15,9, 31]

>     [["next"], "https://example.db.org/"]

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    [["end"], "https://example.db.org/"]
```

An example of a sparse response for a partial array data with aggregated dimensions, multidimensional array:
          
.. code:: json
    {"format": "sparse"}
    [3,5,19, [ [10,20,21], [30,40,50] ]

>     [3,7,19, [["ext"], "https://example.db.org/value2"]]
>     [4,5,19, [ [11, 110], [["ext"], "https://example.db.org/value3"], [550, 333]]

Reviewer 4: I think it should be "ref" here ?
```suggestion
    [3,7,19, [["ref"], "https://example.db.org/value2"]]
    [4,5,19, [ [11, 110], [["ref"], "https://example.db.org/value3"], [550, 333]]
```

The OPTIMADE JSON lines partial data format is a lightweight format for transmitting property data that are too large to fit in a single OPTIMADE response.
The format is based on `JSON Lines <https://jsonlines.org/>`__, which allows for streaming handling of large datasets.

To communicate a property using this format, the usual OPTIMADE response gives the value :val:`null` for the property.
Furthermore, a URL is given which can be used to fetch the missing data.
For responses that use the JSON response format, a subfield :field:`partial_data_urls` of the resource object metadata field, :field:`meta`, is used, see `JSON Response Schema: Common Fields`_.

.. _slice object:

To aid the definition of the "json lines" format below, we first define a "slice object" to be a JSON object describing slices of arrays.
The dictionary has the following OPTIONAL fields:

- :field:`"start"`: Integer.
  The slice starts at the value with the given index (inclusive).
  The default is 0, i.e., the value at the start of the array.
- :field:`"stop"`
  The slice ends at the value with the given index (inclusive).
  If omitted, the end of the slice is not specified.

>   If the end of the slice is not specified when used to express the values included in a response, the client has to count the number of items to know the end.

Reviewer 3: Is "the end of the slice" the same as the "stop" value? If so I see a slight contradiction here with the next sentence.

  If the slice refers to a requested range of items, to omit :field:`stop` has the same meaning as specifying the last index of the array.
- :field:`"step"`
  The absolute difference in index between two subsequent values that are included in the slice.
  The default is 1, i.e., every value in the range indicated by :field:`start` and :field:`stop` is included in the slice.

>   For example, a value of 2 denotes a slice of every second value in the array.

Author: ```suggestion
  Hence, a value of 2 denotes a slice of every second value in the array.
  
For example, for the array `["a", "b", "c", "d", "e", "f", "g", "h", "i", "j"]` the slice start=1, end=7, and step=3 refers to the items `["b", "e", "h"]`.
```

Furthermore, we also define the following special markers:

> - The "end-of-data--marker" is this exact JSON: :val:`[["end"], ""]`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- The "end-of-data--marker" is this exact JSON: :val:`[["end"], ""]`.
The "end-of-data--marker" marker is chosen so that it is a valid JSON object but *not* a valid OPTIMADE value (an OPTIMADE object may not contain values of different types in a list as of v 1.1), which make sure that a valid value will never be misinterpreted as the "end..." marker. 
```

Author: @sauliusg I'm adjusting your formulation; what we rely on is that OPTIMADE lists in properties can only contain one single OPTIMADE datatype. This is not "as of v1.1", but has been there since v1.0: https://github.com/Materials-Consortia/OPTIMADE/blame/v1.0/optimade.rst#L215

- A "reference-marker" is this exact JSON: :val:`[["ref"], "URL"]`, where :val:`"URL"` is to be replaced with a URL being referenced.

> - A "next-marker" is this exact JSON: :val:`[["end"], "URL"]`, where :val:`"URL"` is to be replaced with the target URL for the next link.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- A "next-marker" is this exact JSON: :val:`[["next"], "URL"]`, where :val:`"URL"` is to be replaced with the target URL for the next link.
```

These JSON markers have been deliberately designed as lists with items of mixed data types, and thus cannot be encountered inside the actual data of an OPTIMADE property.

The full response MUST be valid `json lines <https://jsonlines.org/>`__ that adheres to the format:

- The first line is a header object (defined below)
- The following lines are data lines adhering to the formats described below.
- The final line is either an end-of-data--marker (indicating that there is no more data to be given), or a next-marker indicating that more data is available, which can be obtained by retrieving data from the provided URL.

The first line MUST be a JSON object providing header information.
The header object MUST contain the key:

- :field:`"format"`: String.
  A string either equal to :val:`"dense"` or :val:`"sparse"` to indicate whether the returned format is dense or sparse.

The header object MAY also contain the key:

> - :field:`"returned_ranges"`: Array of Object.

Reviewer 5: Don't we typically call this a list of dictionaries elsewhere?

Author: So, I may have slipped up with the terminology elsewhere, but, we somewhat deliberately use different names for OPTIMADE data types that JSON does for their data types. Here we are referring to JSON fields.

>   For dense data and sparse data of one dimensional list properties, the array contains a single element which is a `slice object`_ representing the range of data present in the response.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
  For dense data, and sparse data of one dimensional list properties, the array contains a single element which is a `slice object`_ representing the range of data present in the response.
```

Or do you mean that, if dense, this still applies only for 1D data? Then to be clear I would write "For one dimensional list properties (both dense data and sparse data), ..." to avoid confusion. actually reading again I think this second case is what you mean?

  If the field :field:`"format"` is `"dense"` and :field:`"returned_ranges"` is omitted, then the client MUST assume that the data is a continuous range of data from the start of the array up to the number of elements given until reaching the end-of-data--marker or next-marker.
  In the specific case of a hierarchy of list properties represented as a sparse multi-dimensional array, if the field :field:`"returned_ranges"` is given, it MUST contain one slice object per dimension of the multi-dimensional array, representing slices for each dimension that cover the data given in the response.

The format of data lines of the response (i.e., all lines except the first and the last) depends on whether the header object specifies the format as :val:`"dense"` or :val:`sparse`.

- **Dense format:** In the dense partial data format, each data line reproduces one list item in the OPTIMADE list property being transmitted in JSON format.
  If OPTIMADE list properties are embedded inside the item, they can either be included in full or replaced with a reference-marker.

>   If a list is replaced by a reference marker, the client MAY use the provided URL to obtain the list items, which is then also provided in the JSON lines partial data format.

Reviewer 5: I'm not sure I fully understand this sentence, wouldn't it be enough to say "If a list is replaced by a reference marker, the client MAY use the provided URL to obtain the list items"?

- **Sparse format for one-dimensional list:** When the response sparsely communicates items for a one-dimensional OPTIMADE list property, each data line contains a JSON array on the format:

>   - The first item is the index of the item provided.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
  - The first item is the (zero-based) index of the item provided.
```

>   - The second item is a JSON representation of the item, on the same format as the lines in the dense format.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
  - The second item is a JSON representation of the item, with the same format as the lines in the dense format.
```

>     In the same way as for the dense format, reference-markers are allowed for data that does not fit in the response.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
    In the same way as for the dense format, reference-markers are allowed for data that does not fit in the response (see example below).
```

> - **Sparse format for multi-dimensional lists:** Specifically for the case that the OPTIMADE property represents a series of directly hierarchically embedded lists, the server MAY represent them using a sparse multi-dimensional format.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- **Sparse format for multi-dimensional lists:** We provide a sparse format specifically for the case that the OPTIMADE property represents a series of directly hierarchically embedded lists (i.e., a multidimensional sparse array). Then, the server MAY represent them using the following sparse multi-dimensional format.
```

  In this case, each data line contains a JSON array in the format of:

>   - All items except the last item are coordinates providing indices in the embedded dimensions in the order of outermost to innermost.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
  - All items except the last item are integer zero-based indices of the value being provided in this line; these indices refer to the embedded dimensions in the order of outermost to innermost.
```

>   - The last item is a JSON representation of the item at those coordinates, on the same format as the lines in the dense format.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
  - The last item is a JSON representation of the item at those coordinates, with the same format as the lines in the dense format.
```

    In the same way as for the dense format, reference-markers are allowed for data that does not fit in the response.

Examples

> --------

Reviewer 5: This example should not be in this section, but in the main text of the specs discussing how to specify partial results in general

> An example of an OPTIMADE JSON-API response that contains a link to a partial data protocol URL:

Reviewer 5: Can we say something like "note that there is no requirement on the syntax and format of the `next` URLs." i.e. saying that these are only examples but the servers can decide where to host them, even outside OPTIMADE API endpoints in principle?

.. code:: json
   {
       "data": {
          "type": "structures",
          "id": "2345678",
          "attributes": {
              "a": null
          }
       }
       "meta": {
           "partial_data_urls": {
               "a": [
                   {

>                        "format": "plain-jsonlines",

Reviewer 5: Above the format is called differently? "json lines"? (I would indeed not use the space, but this is not compliant since none of the formats is "jsonlines"?)

                       "url": "https://example.db.org/assets/partial_values/structures/2345678/a/default_format"
                   },
                   {
                       "format": "bzip2-jsonlines",
                       "url": "https://example.db.org/assets/partial_values/structures/2345678/a/bzip2_format"
                   },
                   {

>                        "format": "hdf5",

Reviewer 5: Shall we clarify that these formats are not defined by us? We should also say that it is NOT allowed to have other formats, unless they are prefixed with underscore etc, e.g. `_exmpl_hdf5`, to avoid having confusing formats. So I would 

1. use the correct name for jsonlines (whatever we decide)
2. use `_exmpl_` for all the rest

                       "url": "https://example.db.org/assets/partial_values/structures/2345678/a/hdf5"
                   }
               ]
           }
           "property_metadata": {
               "a": {

               }
           }
       }
   }

> An example of a dense response for a partial array data, scalar values:

Reviewer 5: As a note (wrt my previous comment) this example instead should stay in the appendix since it's about the jsonline format described here.

> An example of a dense response for a partial array data, scalar values:

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
An example of a dense response for a partial array data, scalar values. The request returns the first three items and provides the next-marker link to continue fetching data:
```

.. code:: json
    {"format": "dense", "returned_ranges": [{"start": 10, "stop": 20, "step": 2}]}
    123
    345
    -12.6
    [["next"], "https://example.db.org/value4"]

> An example of a dense response for a partial array data, multidimensional array values:

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
An example of a dense response for a partial array data, multidimensional array values. Item with index 10 in the original list (the first one provided in the response since start=10) is provided explicitly in the response. The item with index 12 in the list (the second provided, since start=10 and step=2) is not provided and only referenced. The third provided item (index 14 in the original list) is only partially returned: it is a list of three items, the first and last ar explicitly provided, the second one is only referenced.
```

Reviewer 5: Important question: do we really want to allow inner references, and not only per-line?

Reviewer 5: Another important question. Is there a way to communicate that this is a rectangular list lists of given shape? This is not the example below since the shape is very different for every line, but how can I e.g. return only:
```
[1, 2]
[1, 2, 3]
[5, 6]
```
and say this is a 3x3 array, and the elements (0,2) and (2,2) are nulls?

.. code:: json
    {"format": "dense", "returned_ranges": [{"start": 10, "stop": 20, "step": 2}]}
    [[10,20,21], [30,40,50]]
    [["ref"], "https://example.db.org/value2"]
    [[11, 110], [["ref"], "https://example.db.org/value3"], [550, 333]]
    [["next"], "https://example.db.org/value4"]

> An example of a sparse response for a partial array data with aggregated dimensions, single dimension array:

Reviewer 5: I'm not sure I fully understand the following examples, what is the underlying shape of the data we are representing? Maybe I'll ask you in person. In general, anyway, I would write in works what they represent: "This indicates that there are only 2 non-null values in a 3-D sparse array of variable-length one-dimensional arrays, one at coordinates (3, 5, 19) with value ..." etc

    #BEGIN ERE strings
    "([^\"]|\\.)*"
    #END ERE strings

OPTIMADE JSON lines partial data format
---------------------------------------
The OPTIMADE JSON lines partial data format is a lightweight format for transmitting property data that are too large to fit in a single OPTIMADE response.

> The format is based on `JSON Lines <https://jsonlines.org/>`__, which allows for streaming handling of large datasets.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The format is based on `JSON Lines <https://jsonlines.org/>`__, which enables streaming of JSON data.
```

Note: since the below definition references both JSON fields and OPTIMADE properties, the data type names depend on context: for JSON they are, e.g., "array" and "object" and for OPTIMADE properties they are, e.g., "list" and "dictionary".

.. _slice object:

To aid the definition of the format below, we first define a "slice object" to be a JSON object describing slices of arrays.
The dictionary has the following OPTIONAL fields:

- :field:`"start"`: Integer.
  The slice starts at the value with the given index (inclusive).
  The default is 0, i.e., the value at the start of the array.
- :field:`"stop"`: Integer.
  The slice ends at the value with the given index (inclusive).
  If omitted, the end of the slice is the last index of the array.
- :field:`"step"`: Integer.
  The absolute difference in index between two subsequent values that are included in the slice.
  The default is 1, i.e., every value in the range indicated by :field:`start` and :field:`stop` is included in the slice.
  Hence, a value of 2 denotes a slice of every second value in the array.

> For example, for the array `["a", "b", "c", "d", "e", "f", "g", "h", "i", "j"]` the slice object `{"start":1, "end":7, "step": 3}` refers to the items `["b", "e", "h"]`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, for the array `["a", "b", "c", "d", "e", "f", "g", "h", "i", "j"]` the slice object `{"start": 1, "end": 7, "step": 3}` refers to the items `["b", "e", "h"]`.
```

Furthermore, we also define the following special markers:

- The "end-of-data-marker" is this exact JSON: :val:`["end", [""]]`.

> - A "reference-marker" is this exact JSON: :val:`["ref", ["URL"]]`, where :val:`"URL"` is to be replaced with a URL being referenced.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A "reference-marker" is this exact JSON: :val:`["ref", ["<url>"]]`, where :val:`"<url>"` is to be replaced with a URL being referenced.
```

maybe slightly clearer?

> - A "next-marker" is this exact JSON: :val:`["next", ["URL"]]`, where :val:`"URL"` is to be replaced with the target URL for the next link.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A "next-marker" is this exact JSON: :val:`["next", ["<url>"]]`, where :val:`"<url>"` is to be replaced with the target URL for the next link.
```

There is no requirement on the syntax or format of the URLs provided in these markers.
The data provided via the URLs MUST be the JSON lines partial data format, i.e., the markers cannot be used to link to partial data provided in other formats.
The markers have been deliberately designed to be valid JSON objects but *not* valid OPTIMADE property values.
Since the OPTIMADE list data type is defined as list of values of the same data type or :val:`null`, the above markers cannot be encountered inside the actual data of an OPTIMADE property.

The full response MUST be valid `JSON Lines <https://jsonlines.org/>`__ that adheres to the following format:

> - The first line is a header object (defined below)

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
- The first line is a header object (defined below).
```

- The following lines are data lines adhering to the formats described below.
- The final line is either an end-of-data-marker (indicating that there is no more data to be given), or a next-marker indicating that more data is available, which can be obtained by retrieving data from the provided URL.

The first line MUST be a JSON object providing header information.
The header object MUST contain the key:

> - :field:`"format"`: String.
>   A string either equal to :val:`"dense"` or :val:`"sparse"` to indicate whether the returned format is dense or sparse.

Author: ```suggestion
- :field:`"optimade-partial-data"`: Object.
  An object that identifying the response as being on OPTIMADE partial data format.
  It MUST contain the following key:
  
  - :field:`"partial-data-format"`: String.
    Specifies the minor version of the partial data format used. The string MUST be of the format "MAJOR.MINOR", referring to the version of the OPTIMADE standard that describes the format. The version number string MUST NOT be prefixed by, e.g., "v". In implementations of the present version of the standard, the value MUST be exactly :val:`1.2`. 

- :field:`"format"`: String.
  A string either equal to :val:`"dense"` or :val:`"sparse"` to indicate whether the returned format is dense or sparse.
```

>   A string either equal to :val:`"dense"` or :val:`"sparse"` to indicate whether the returned format is dense or sparse.

Reviewer: This is not sufficient to identify the stream as containing OPTIMADE data, can we also use the key from #471? Something like

```json
{"x-optimade": {"format": "dense", "api_version": "1.2.0"}}
```

Author: So, what do you think of the "optimade-partial-data" I added? I don't want to mess too much with the rest of the header unless/until others chime in.

The header object MAY also contain the key:

- :field:`"returned_ranges"`: Array of Object.
  For dense data, and sparse data of one dimensional list properties, the array contains a single element which is a `slice object`_ representing the range of data present in the response.
  Once the client has encountered an end-of-data-marker, any data not covered by any of the encountered slices are to be assigned the value :val:`null`.

>   If the field :field:`"format"` is `"dense"` and :field:`"returned_ranges"` is omitted, then the client MUST assume that the data is a continuous range of data from the start of the array up to the number of elements given until reaching the end-of-data-marker or next-marker. 

Author: ```suggestion
  If the field :field:`"format"` is `"dense"` and :field:`"returned_ranges"` is omitted, then the client MUST assume that the data is a continuous range of data from the start of the array up to the number of elements given until reaching the end-of-data-marker or next-marker.
```

The item with index 10 in the original list is provided explicitly in the response and is the first one provided in the response since start=10.
The item with index 12 in the list, the second data item provided since start=10 and step=2, is not included only referenced.
The third provided item (index 14 in the original list) is only partially returned: it is a list of three items, the first and last are explicitly provided, the second one is only referenced.

.. code:: json
    {"format": "dense", "returned_ranges": [{"start": 10, "stop": 20, "step": 2}]}
    [[10,20,21], [30,40,50]]
    ["ref", ["https://example.db.org/value2"]]
    [[11, 110], ["ref", ["https://example.db.org/value3"]], [550, 333]]
    ["next", ["https://example.db.org/value4"]]

Below follows an example of the sparse format for multi-dimensional lists with three aggregated dimensions.
The underlying property value can be taken to be sparse data in lists in four dimensions of 10000 x 10000 x 10000 x N, where the innermost list is a non-sparse list of abitrary length of numbers.
The only non-null items in the outer three dimensions are, say, [3,5,19], [30,15,9], and [42,54,17].

> The response below communicates the first item explicitly; the second one by defering the innermost list using a reference-marker; and the third item is not included in this response, but defered to another page via a next-marker.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
The response below communicates the first item explicitly; the second one by deferring the innermost list using a reference-marker; and the third item is not included in this response, but deferred to another page via a next-marker.
```

    #BEGIN ERE strings
    "([^\"]|\\.)*"
    #END ERE strings

OPTIMADE JSON lines partial data format
---------------------------------------
The OPTIMADE JSON lines partial data format is a lightweight format for transmitting property data that are too large to fit in a single OPTIMADE response.
The format is based on `JSON Lines <https://jsonlines.org/>`__, which allows for streaming handling of large datasets.
Note: since the below definition references both JSON fields and OPTIMADE properties, the data type names depend on context: for JSON they are, e.g., "array" and "object" and for OPTIMADE properties they are, e.g., "list" and "dictionary".

.. _slice object:

To aid the definition of the format below, we first define a "slice object" to be a JSON object describing slices of arrays.
The dictionary has the following OPTIONAL fields:

- :field:`"start"`: Integer.
  The slice starts at the value with the given index (inclusive).
  The default is 0, i.e., the value at the start of the array.

> - :field:`"stop"`: Integer.
>   The slice ends at the value with the given index (inclusive).
>   If omitted, the end of the slice is not specified.
>   If the slice is used to express the values included in a response and :field:`stop` is omitted, the client has to count the number of items to know the end.
>   If the slice is used to request a range of items, to omit :field:`stop` has the same meaning as specifying the last index of the array.

Author: ```suggestion
- :field:`"stop"`: Integer.
  The slice ends at the value with the given index (inclusive).
  If omitted, the end of the slice is the last index of the array.
```

The full response MUST be valid `JSON Lines <https://jsonlines.org/>`__ that adheres to the following format:

- The first line is a header object (defined below)
- The following lines are data lines adhering to the formats described below.
- The final line is either an end-of-data-marker (indicating that there is no more data to be given), or a next-marker indicating that more data is available, which can be obtained by retrieving data from the provided URL.

The first line MUST be a JSON object providing header information.
The header object MUST contain the key:

- :field:`"format"`: String.
  A string either equal to :val:`"dense"` or :val:`"sparse"` to indicate whether the returned format is dense or sparse.

The header object MAY also contain the key:

- :field:`"returned_ranges"`: Array of Object.
  For dense data, and sparse data of one dimensional list properties, the array contains a single element which is a `slice object`_ representing the range of data present in the response.
  Once the client has encountered an end-of-data-marker, any data not covered by any of the encountered slices are to be assigned the value :val:`null`.

>   If the field :field:`"format"` is `"dense"` and :field:`"returned_ranges"` is omitted, then the client MUST assume that the data is a continuous range of data from the start of the array up to the number of elements given until reaching the end-of-data-marker or next-marker.
>   In the specific case of a hierarchy of list properties represented as a sparse multi-dimensional array, if the field :field:`"returned_ranges"` is given, it MUST contain one slice object per dimension of the multi-dimensional array, representing slices for each dimension that cover the data given in the response.

Author: ```suggestion
  If the field :field:`"format"` is `"dense"` and :field:`"returned_ranges"` is omitted, then the client MUST assume that the data is a continuous range of data from the start of the array up to the number of elements given until reaching the end-of-data-marker or next-marker. 
  If :field:`"returned_ranges"` is included and the client encounters a next or end-of-data-marker before receiving all lines indicated by the slice, it should proceed by not assigning any values to those items, i.e., this is not an error.
  In the specific case of a hierarchy of list properties represented as a sparse multi-dimensional array, if the field :field:`"returned_ranges"` is given, it MUST contain one slice object per dimension of the multi-dimensional array, representing slices for each dimension that cover the data given in the response.
```

> The format of data lines of the response (i.e., all lines except the first and the last) depends on whether the header object specifies the format as :val:`"dense"` or :val:`sparse`.

Author: ```suggestion
The format of data lines of the response (i.e., all lines except the first and the last) depends on whether the header object specifies the format as :val:`"dense"` or :val:`"sparse"`.
```

  Then, the server MAY represent them using the following sparse multi-dimensional format for a number of aggregated dimensions.
  In this case, each data line contains a JSON array in the format of:

  - All items except the last item are integer zero-based indices of the value being provided in this line; these indices refer to the aggregated dimensions in the order of outermost to innermost.
  - The last item is a JSON representation of the item at those coordinates, with the same format as the lines in the dense format.
    In the same way as for the dense format, reference-markers are allowed for data that does not fit in the response.

Examples
--------

Below follows an example of a dense response for a partial array data of integer values.
The request returns the first three items and provides the next-marker link to continue fetching data:

.. code:: json
    {"format": "dense", "returned_ranges": [{"start": 10, "stop": 20, "step": 2}]}
    123
    345
    -12.6

>     [["next"], "https://example.db.org/value4"]

Author: ```suggestion
    ["next", ["https://example.db.org/value4"]]
```

Below follows an example of a dense response for a list property as a partial array of multidimensional array values.
The item with index 10 in the original list is provided explicitly in the response and is the first one provided in the response since start=10.
The item with index 12 in the list, the second data item provided since start=10 and step=2, is not included only referenced.
The third provided item (index 14 in the original list) is only partially returned: it is a list of three items, the first and last are explicitly provided, the second one is only referenced.

.. code:: json
    {"format": "dense", "returned_ranges": [{"start": 10, "stop": 20, "step": 2}]}
    [[10,20,21], [30,40,50]]
    [["ref"], "https://example.db.org/value2"]
    [[11, 110], [["ref"], "https://example.db.org/value3"], [550, 333]]

>     [["next"], "https://example.db.org/value4"]

Author: ```suggestion
    ["next", ["https://example.db.org/value4"]]
```

>     [["ref"], "https://example.db.org/value2"]
>     [[11, 110], [["ref"], "https://example.db.org/value3"], [550, 333]]
>     [["next"], "https://example.db.org/value4"]

Author: ```suggestion
    ["ref", ["https://example.db.org/value2"]]
    [[11, 110], ["ref", ["https://example.db.org/value3"]], [550, 333]]
    ["next", ["https://example.db.org/value4"]]
```

Below follows an example of the sparse format for multi-dimensional lists with three aggregated dimensions.
The underlying property value can be taken to be sparse data in lists in four dimensions of 10000 x 10000 x 10000 x N, where the innermost list is a non-sparse list of abitrary length of numbers.
The only non-null items in the outer three dimensions are, say, [3,5,19], [30,15,9], and [42,54,17].
The response below communicates the first item explicitly; the second one by defering the innermost list using a reference-marker; and the third item is not included in this response, but defered to another page via a next-marker.

.. code:: json
    {"format": "sparse"}
    [3,5,19,  [10,20,21,30]]

>     [30,15,9, [["ref"], "https://example.db.org/value1"]]
>     [["next"], "https://example.db.org/"]

Author: ```suggestion
    [30,15,9, ["ref", ["https://example.db.org/value1"]]]
    ["next", ["https://example.db.org/"]]
```

An example of the sparse format for multi-dimensional lists with three aggregated dimensions and integer values:

.. code:: json
    {"format": "sparse"}
    [3,5,19,  10]
    [30,15,9, 31]

>     [["next"], "https://example.db.org/"]

Author: ```suggestion
    ["next", ["https://example.db.org/"]]
```

.. _slice object:

To aid the definition of the format below, we first define a "slice object" to be a JSON object describing slices of arrays.
The dictionary has the following OPTIONAL fields:

- :field:`"start"`: Integer.
  The slice starts at the value with the given index (inclusive).
  The default is 0, i.e., the value at the start of the array.
- :field:`"stop"`: Integer.
  The slice ends at the value with the given index (inclusive).
  If omitted, the end of the slice is the last index of the array.
- :field:`"step"`: Integer.
  The absolute difference in index between two subsequent values that are included in the slice.
  The default is 1, i.e., every value in the range indicated by :field:`start` and :field:`stop` is included in the slice.
  Hence, a value of 2 denotes a slice of every second value in the array.

For example, for the array `["a", "b", "c", "d", "e", "f", "g", "h", "i", "j"]` the slice object `{"start": 1, "end": 7, "step": 3}` refers to the items `["b", "e", "h"]`.

Furthermore, we also define the following special markers:

> - The "end-of-data-marker" is this exact JSON: :val:`["end", [""]]`.
> - A "reference-marker" is this exact JSON: :val:`["ref", ["<url>"]]`, where :val:`"<url>"` is to be replaced with a URL being referenced.
> - A "next-marker" is this exact JSON: :val:`["next", ["<url>"]]`, where :val:`"<url>"` is to be replaced with the target URL for the next link.

Author: ```suggestion
- The "end-of-data-marker" is this exact JSON: :val:`["OPTIMADE-PARTIAL-DATA-END", [""]]`.
- A "reference-marker" is this exact JSON: :val:`["OPTIMADE-PARTIAL-DATA-REF", ["<url>"]]`, where :val:`"<url>"` is to be replaced with a URL being referenced.
- A "next-marker" is this exact JSON: :val:`["OPTIMADE-PARTIAL-DATA-NEXT", ["<url>"]]`, where :val:`"<url>"` is to be replaced with the target URL for the next link.
```

There is no requirement on the syntax or format of the URLs provided in these markers.
The data provided via the URLs MUST be the JSON lines partial data format, i.e., the markers cannot be used to link to partial data provided in other formats.
The markers have been deliberately designed to be valid JSON objects but *not* valid OPTIMADE property values.

> Since the OPTIMADE list data type is defined as list of values of the same data type or :val:`null`, the above markers cannot be encountered inside the actual data of an OPTIMADE property.

Author: ```suggestion
Since the OPTIMADE list data type is defined as a list of values of the same data type or :val:`null`, the above markers cannot be encountered inside the actual data of an OPTIMADE property.

    Implementation note: the unusual string values for the markers should make it possible to, with a high level of precision, determine lines that do not need further processing for potential reference-markers via a pre-scanning step just on the raw JSON text data (or, alternatively, by hooking into the string parser used by the JSON parser to trigger the additional processing only when these strings are detected).
    This should help performance when parsing partial data with only occasional reference-markers. 
```

    In the same way as for the dense format, reference-markers are allowed for data that does not fit in the response.

Examples
--------

Below follows an example of a dense response for a partial array data of integer values.
The request returns the first three items and provides the next-marker link to continue fetching data:

.. code:: json
    {"format": "dense", "returned_ranges": [{"start": 10, "stop": 20, "step": 2}]}
    123
    345
    -12.6
    ["next", ["https://example.db.org/value4"]]

Below follows an example of a dense response for a list property as a partial array of multidimensional array values.
The item with index 10 in the original list is provided explicitly in the response and is the first one provided in the response since start=10.
The item with index 12 in the list, the second data item provided since start=10 and step=2, is not included only referenced.
The third provided item (index 14 in the original list) is only partially returned: it is a list of three items, the first and last are explicitly provided, the second one is only referenced.

> .. code:: json
>     {"format": "dense", "returned_ranges": [{"start": 10, "stop": 20, "step": 2}]}
>     [[10,20,21], [30,40,50]]
>     ["ref", ["https://example.db.org/value2"]]
>     [[11, 110], ["ref", ["https://example.db.org/value3"]], [550, 333]]
>     ["next", ["https://example.db.org/value4"]]

Author: ```suggestion
.. code:: json
    {"format": "dense", "returned_ranges": [{"start": 10, "stop": 20, "step": 2}]}
    [[10,20,21], [30,40,50]]
    ["PARTIAL-DATA-REF", ["https://example.db.org/value2"]]
    [[11, 110], ["PARTIAL-DATA-REF", ["https://example.db.org/value3"]], [550, 333]]
    ["PARTIAL-DATA-NEXT", ["https://example.db.org/value4"]]
```

Below follows an example of the sparse format for multi-dimensional lists with three aggregated dimensions.
The underlying property value can be taken to be sparse data in lists in four dimensions of 10000 x 10000 x 10000 x N, where the innermost list is a non-sparse list of abitrary length of numbers.
The only non-null items in the outer three dimensions are, say, [3,5,19], [30,15,9], and [42,54,17].
The response below communicates the first item explicitly; the second one by deferring the innermost list using a reference-marker; and the third item is not included in this response, but deferred to another page via a next-marker.

> .. code:: json
>     {"format": "sparse"}
>     [3,5,19,  [10,20,21,30]]
>     [30,15,9, ["ref", ["https://example.db.org/value1"]]]
>     ["next", ["https://example.db.org/"]]

Author: ```suggestion
.. code:: json
    {"format": "sparse"}
    [3,5,19,  [10,20,21,30]]
    [30,15,9, ["PARTIAL-DATA-REF", ["https://example.db.org/value1"]]]
    ["PARTIAL-DATA-NEXT", ["https://example.db.org/"]]
```

An example of the sparse format for multi-dimensional lists with three aggregated dimensions and integer values:

> .. code:: json
>     {"format": "sparse"}
>     [3,5,19,  10]
>     [30,15,9, 31]
>     ["next", ["https://example.db.org/"]]

Author: ```suggestion
.. code:: json
    {"format": "sparse"}
    [3,5,19,  10]
    [30,15,9, 31]
    ["PARTIAL-DATA-NEXT", ["https://example.db.org/"]]
```

An example of the sparse format for multi-dimensional lists with three aggregated dimensions and values that are multidimensional lists of integers of arbitrary lengths:

> .. code:: json
>     {"format": "sparse"}
>     [3,5,19, [ [10,20,21], [30,40,50] ]
>     [3,7,19, ["ref", ["https://example.db.org/value2"]]]
>     [4,5,19, [ [11, 110], ["ref", ["https://example.db.org/value3"]], [550, 333]]
>     ["end", [""]]

Author: ```suggestion
.. code:: json
    {"format": "sparse"}
    [3,5,19, [ [10,20,21], [30,40,50] ]
    [3,7,19, ["PARTIAL-DATA-REF", ["https://example.db.org/value2"]]]
    [4,5,19, [ [11, 110], ["PARTIAL-DATA-REF", ["https://example.db.org/value3"]], [550, 333]]
    ["PARTIAL-DATA-END", [""]]
```

    This should help performance when parsing partial data with only occasional reference-markers. 

The full response MUST be valid `JSON Lines <https://jsonlines.org/>`__ that adheres to the following format:

- The first line is a header object (defined below).
- The following lines are data lines adhering to the formats described below.
- The final line is either an end-of-data-marker (indicating that there is no more data to be given), or a next-marker indicating that more data is available, which can be obtained by retrieving data from the provided URL.

The first line MUST be a JSON object providing header information.
The header object MUST contain the key:

- :field:`"optimade-partial-data"`: Object.
  An object that identifying the response as being on OPTIMADE partial data format.
  It MUST contain the following key:

>   - :field:`"partial-data-format"`: String.

Author: ```suggestion
  - :field:`"format"`: String.
```

    Specifies the minor version of the partial data format used. The string MUST be of the format "MAJOR.MINOR", referring to the version of the OPTIMADE standard that describes the format. The version number string MUST NOT be prefixed by, e.g., "v". In implementations of the present version of the standard, the value MUST be exactly :val:`1.2`.

> - :field:`"format"`: String.
>   A string either equal to :val:`"dense"` or :val:`"sparse"` to indicate whether the returned format is dense or sparse.

Author: ```suggestion
- :field:`"representation"`: String.
  A string either equal to :val:`"dense"` or :val:`"sparse"` to indicate whether the returned format is dense or sparse.
```

The header object MAY also contain the key:

> - :field:`"returned_ranges"`: Array of Object.
>   For dense data, and sparse data of one dimensional list properties, the array contains a single element which is a `slice object`_ representing the range of data present in the response.

Author: ```suggestion
- :field:`"returned_ranges"`: Array of Object.
  For dense data, and sparse data of one dimensional list properties, the array contains a single element which is a `slice object`_ representing the range of data present in the response.
  
- :field:`"has_references"`: Boolean.
  An optional boolean to indicate whether any of the data lines in the response contains a reference marker.
  By including this field and giving it the value :val:`false`, a server can indicate that the client does not have to process any of the lines to detect reference markers.
```

  Once the client has encountered an end-of-data-marker, any data not covered by any of the encountered slices are to be assigned the value :val:`null`.

>   If the field :field:`"format"` is `"dense"` and :field:`"returned_ranges"` is omitted, then the client MUST assume that the data is a continuous range of data (possibly with a `step` between continuous indices) from the start of the array up to the number of elements given until reaching the end-of-data-marker or next-marker.

Author: ```suggestion
  If the field :field:`"representation"` is `"dense"` and :field:`"returned_ranges"` is omitted, then the client MUST assume that the data is a continuous range of data (possibly with a `step` between continuous indices) from the start of the array up to the number of elements given until reaching the end-of-data-marker or next-marker.
```

If :field:`"returned_ranges"` is included and the client encounters a next-marker before receiving all lines indicated by the slice, it should proceed by not assigning any values to those items, i.e., this is not an error.
Since the remaining values are not assigned a value, they will be :val:`null` if they are not assigned in another response retrieved via a next link encountered before the end-of-data-marker.
(Since there is no requirement that values are assigned in order between responses, it is possible the omitted values have already been assigned.
In that case they shall remain as assigned, i.e., they are not overwritten by :val:`null` in this situation.)
  In the specific case of a hierarchy of list properties represented as a sparse multi-dimensional array, if the field :field:`"returned_ranges"` is given, it MUST contain one slice object per dimension of the multi-dimensional array, representing slices for each dimension that cover the data given in the response.

> The format of data lines of the response (i.e., all lines except the first and the last) depends on whether the header object specifies the format as :val:`"dense"` or :val:`"sparse"`.

Author: ```suggestion
The format of data lines of the response (i.e., all lines except the first and the last) depends on whether the header object specifies the representation as :val:`"dense"` or :val:`"sparse"`.
```

> - **Dense format:** In the dense partial data format, each data line reproduces one list item in the OPTIMADE list property being transmitted in JSON format.
>   If OPTIMADE list properties are embedded inside the item, they can either be included in full or replaced with a reference-marker.
>   If a list is replaced by a reference marker, the client MAY use the provided URL to obtain the list items.
> 
> - **Sparse format for one-dimensional list:** When the response sparsely communicates items for a one-dimensional OPTIMADE list property, each data line contains a JSON array on the format:
> 
>   - The first item is the zero-based index of the item provided.
>   - The second item is a JSON representation of the item, with the same format as the lines in the dense format.
>     In the same way as for the dense format, reference-markers are allowed for data that does not fit in the response (see example below).
> 
> - **Sparse format for multi-dimensional lists:** We provide a sparse format specifically for the case that the OPTIMADE property represents a series of directly hierarchically embedded lists (i.e., a multidimensional sparse array).
>   Then, the server MAY represent them using the following sparse multi-dimensional format for a number of aggregated dimensions.
>   In this case, each data line contains a JSON array in the format of:
> 
>   - All items except the last item are integer zero-based indices of the value being provided in this line; these indices refer to the aggregated dimensions in the order of outermost to innermost.
>   - The last item is a JSON representation of the item at those coordinates, with the same format as the lines in the dense format.
>     In the same way as for the dense format, reference-markers are allowed for data that does not fit in the response.

Author: ```suggestion
- **Dense representation:** In the dense partial data representation, each data line reproduces one list item in the OPTIMADE list property being transmitted in JSON format.
  If OPTIMADE list properties are embedded inside the item, they can either be included in full or replaced with a reference-marker.
  If a list is replaced by a reference marker, the client MAY use the provided URL to obtain the list items.

- **Sparse representation for one-dimensional list:** When the response sparsely communicates items for a one-dimensional OPTIMADE list property, each data line contains a JSON array on the format:

  - The first item is the zero-based index of the item provided.
  - The second item is a JSON representation of the item, with the same format as the lines in the dense format.
    In the same way as for the dense representation, reference-markers are allowed for data that does not fit in the response (see example below).

- **Sparse representation for multi-dimensional lists:** We provide a sparse representation specifically for the case that the OPTIMADE property represents a series of directly hierarchically embedded lists (i.e., a multidimensional sparse array).
  Then, the server MAY represent them using the following sparse multi-dimensional representation for a number of aggregated dimensions.
  In this case, each data line contains a JSON array in the format of:

  - All items except the last item are integer zero-based indices of the value being provided in this line; these indices refer to the aggregated dimensions in the order of outermost to innermost.
  - The last item is a JSON representation of the item at those coordinates, with the same format as the lines in the dense representation.
    In the same way as for the dense representation, reference-markers are allowed for data that does not fit in the response.
```

Examples
--------

Below follows an example of a dense response for a partial array data of integer values.
The request returns the first three items and provides the next-marker link to continue fetching data:

.. code:: json
    {"format": "dense", "returned_ranges": [{"start": 10, "stop": 20, "step": 2}]}
    123
    345
    -12.6

>     ["next", ["https://example.db.org/value4"]]

Author: ```suggestion
    ["PARTIAL-DATA-NEXT", ["https://example.db.org/value4"]]
```

Below follows an example of a dense response for a list property as a partial array of multidimensional array values.
The item with index 10 in the original list is provided explicitly in the response and is the first one provided in the response since start=10.
The item with index 12 in the list, the second data item provided since start=10 and step=2, is not included only referenced.
The third provided item (index 14 in the original list) is only partially returned: it is a list of three items, the first and last are explicitly provided, the second one is only referenced.

.. code:: json

>     {"format": "dense", "returned_ranges": [{"start": 10, "stop": 20, "step": 2}]}

Author: ```suggestion
    {"representation": "dense", "returned_ranges": [{"start": 10, "stop": 20, "step": 2}]}
```

    [[10,20,21], [30,40,50]]
    ["PARTIAL-DATA-REF", ["https://example.db.org/value2"]]
    [[11, 110], ["PARTIAL-DATA-REF", ["https://example.db.org/value3"]], [550, 333]]
    ["PARTIAL-DATA-NEXT", ["https://example.db.org/value4"]]

> Below follows an example of the sparse format for multi-dimensional lists with three aggregated dimensions.

Author: ```suggestion
Below follows an example of the sparse representation for multi-dimensional lists with three aggregated dimensions.
```

The underlying property value can be taken to be sparse data in lists in four dimensions of 10000 x 10000 x 10000 x N, where the innermost list is a non-sparse list of abitrary length of numbers.
The only non-null items in the outer three dimensions are, say, [3,5,19], [30,15,9], and [42,54,17].
The response below communicates the first item explicitly; the second one by deferring the innermost list using a reference-marker; and the third item is not included in this response, but deferred to another page via a next-marker.

.. code:: json

>     {"format": "sparse"}

Author: ```suggestion
    {"representation": "sparse"}
```

    [3,5,19,  [10,20,21,30]]
    [30,15,9, ["PARTIAL-DATA-REF", ["https://example.db.org/value1"]]]
    ["PARTIAL-DATA-NEXT", ["https://example.db.org/"]]

> An example of the sparse format for multi-dimensional lists with three aggregated dimensions and integer values:

Author: ```suggestion
An example of the sparse representation for multi-dimensional lists with three aggregated dimensions and integer values:
```

.. code:: json

>     {"format": "sparse"}

Author: ```suggestion
    {"representation": "sparse"}
```

    [3,5,19,  10]
    [30,15,9, 31]
    ["PARTIAL-DATA-NEXT", ["https://example.db.org/"]]

> An example of the sparse format for multi-dimensional lists with three aggregated dimensions and values that are multidimensional lists of integers of arbitrary lengths:

Author: ```suggestion
An example of the sparse representation for multi-dimensional lists with three aggregated dimensions and values that are multidimensional lists of integers of arbitrary lengths:
```

.. code:: json

>     {"format": "sparse"}

Author: ```suggestion
    {"representation": "sparse"}
```

    Implementation note: the unusual string values for the markers should make it possible to, with a high level of precision, determine lines that do not need further processing for potential reference-markers via a pre-scanning step just on the raw JSON text data (or, alternatively, by hooking into the string parser used by the JSON parser to trigger the additional processing only when these strings are detected).
    This should help performance when parsing partial data with only occasional reference-markers. 

The full response MUST be valid `JSON Lines <https://jsonlines.org/>`__ that adheres to the following format:

- The first line is a header object (defined below).
- The following lines are data lines adhering to the formats described below.
- The final line is either an end-of-data-marker (indicating that there is no more data to be given), or a next-marker indicating that more data is available, which can be obtained by retrieving data from the provided URL.

The first line MUST be a JSON object providing header information.

> The header object MUST contain the key:

Author: ```suggestion
The header object MUST contain the keys:
```

  An object that MUST have the following two keys:

  - :field:`"id"`: String.
    The id of the entry of the property being provided.

  - :field:`"type"`: String.
    The type of the entry of the property being provided.

- :field:`"has_references"`: Boolean.
  An optional boolean to indicate whether any of the data lines in the response contains a reference marker.
  By including this field and giving it the value :val:`false`, a server MAY indicate that the client does not have to process any of the lines to detect reference markers.
  Once the client has encountered an end-of-data-marker, any data not covered by any of the encountered slices are to be assigned the value :val:`null`.

- :field:`"links"`: Object.

  An object to provide relevant links for the property being provided.
  It MAY contain the following key:

  - :field:`base_url`: String.
    The base URL of the implementation serving the database to which this property belongs.

- :field:`"returned_ranges"`: Array of Object.
  For dense data, and sparse data of one dimensional list properties, the array contains a single element which is a `slice object`_ representing the range of data present in the response.

> If the field :field:`"layout"` is :val:`"dense"` and :field:`"returned_ranges"` is omitted, then the client MUST assume that the data is a continuous range of data from the start of the array up to the number of elements given until reaching the end-of-data-marker or next-marker.

Author: ```suggestion
Once the client has encountered an end-of-data-marker, any data not covered by any of the encountered slices are to be assigned the value :val:`null`.

If the field :field:`"layout"` is :val:`"dense"` and :field:`"returned_ranges"` is omitted, then the client MUST assume that the data is a continuous range of data from the start of the array up to the number of elements given until reaching the end-of-data-marker or next-marker.
```

- The first line is a header object (defined below).
- The following lines are data lines adhering to the formats described below.
- The final line is either an end-of-data-marker (indicating that there is no more data to be given), or a next-marker indicating that more data is available, which can be obtained by retrieving data from the provided URL.

The first line MUST be a JSON object providing header information.
The header object MUST contain the keys:

- :field:`"optimade-partial-data"`: Object.
  An object that identifying the response as being on OPTIMADE partial data format.

  It MUST contain the following key:

  - :field:`"format"`: String.
    Specifies the minor version of the partial data format used. The string MUST be of the format "MAJOR.MINOR", referring to the version of the OPTIMADE standard that describes the format. The version number string MUST NOT be prefixed by, e.g., "v". In implementations of the present version of the standard, the value MUST be exactly :val:`1.2`.

- :field:`"layout"`: String.
  A string either equal to :val:`"dense"` or :val:`"sparse"` to indicate whether the returned format uses a dense or sparse layout.

> The header object MAY also contain the keys:
> 
> - :field:`"property_name"`: String.
>   The name of the property being provided.
> 
> - :field:`"entry"`: Object.
>   An object that MUST have the following two keys:
> 
>   - :field:`"id"`: String.
>     The id of the entry of the property being provided.
> 
>   - :field:`"type"`: String.
>     The type of the entry of the property being provided.
> 
> - :field:`"has_references"`: Boolean.
>   An optional boolean to indicate whether any of the data lines in the response contains a reference marker.
>   By including this field and giving it the value :val:`false`, a server MAY indicate that the client does not have to process any of the lines to detect reference markers.
> 
> - :field:`"links"`: Object.
> 
>   An object to provide relevant links for the property being provided.
>   It MAY contain the following key:
> 
>   - :field:`base_url`: String.
>     The base URL of the implementation serving the database to which this property belongs.
> 
> - :field:`"returned_ranges"`: Array of Object.
>   For dense data, and sparse data of one dimensional list properties, the array contains a single element which is a `slice object`_ representing the range of data present in the response.

Author: ```suggestion
The following key is RECOMMENDED in the header object:

- :field:`"returned_ranges"`: Array of Object.
  For dense layout, and sparse layout of one dimensional list properties, the array contains a single element which is a `slice object`_ representing the range of data present in the response.
  In the specific case of a hierarchy of list properties represented as a sparse multi-dimensional array, if the field :field:`"returned_ranges"` is given, it MUST contain one slice object per dimension of the multi-dimensional array, representing slices for each dimension that cover the data given in the response.

The header object MAY also contain the keys:

- :field:`"property_name"`: String.
  The name of the property being provided.

- :field:`"entry"`: Object.
  An object that MUST have the following two keys:

  - :field:`"id"`: String.
    The id of the entry of the property being provided.

  - :field:`"type"`: String.
    The type of the entry of the property being provided.

- :field:`"has_references"`: Boolean.
  An optional boolean to indicate whether any of the data lines in the response contains a reference marker.
  By including this field and giving it the value :val:`false`, a server MAY indicate that the client does not have to process any of the lines to detect reference markers.

- :field:`"links"`: Object.

  An object to provide relevant links for the property being provided.
  It MAY contain the following key:

  - :field:`base_url`: String.
    The base URL of the implementation serving the database to which this property belongs.

```

Once the client has encountered an end-of-data-marker, any data not covered by any of the encountered slices are to be assigned the value :val:`null`.

If the field :field:`"layout"` is :val:`"dense"` and :field:`"returned_ranges"` is omitted, then the client MUST assume that the data is a continuous range of data from the start of the array up to the number of elements given until reaching the end-of-data-marker or next-marker.
If :field:`"returned_ranges"` is included and the client encounters a next-marker before receiving all lines indicated by the slice, it should proceed by not assigning any values to the corresponding items, i.e., this is not an error.
Since the remaining values are not assigned a value, they will be :val:`null` if they are not assigned values by another response retrieved via a next link encountered before the end-of-data-marker.
(Since there is no requirement that values are assigned in a specific order between responses, it is possible that the omitted values are already assigned.
In that case the values shall remain as assigned, i.e., they are not overwritten by :val:`null` in this situation.)

> In the specific case of a hierarchy of list properties represented as a sparse multi-dimensional array, if the field :field:`"returned_ranges"` is given, it MUST contain one slice object per dimension of the multi-dimensional array, representing slices for each dimension that cover the data given in the response.

Author: ```suggestion
```

The only non-null items in the outer three dimensions are, say, [3,5,19], [30,15,9], and [42,54,17].
The response below communicates the first item explicitly; the second one by deferring the innermost list using a reference-marker; and the third item is not included in this response, but deferred to another page via a next-marker.

.. code:: json

    {"optimade-partial-data": {"format": "1.2.0"}, "layout": "sparse"}
    [3,5,19,  [10,20,21,30]]
    [30,15,9, ["PARTIAL-DATA-REF", ["https://example.db.org/value1"]]]
    ["PARTIAL-DATA-NEXT", ["https://example.db.org/"]]

An example of the sparse layout for multi-dimensional lists with three aggregated dimensions and integer values:

.. code:: json

    {"optimade-partial-data": {"format": "1.2.0"}, "layout": "sparse"}
    [3,5,19,  10]
    [30,15,9, 31]
    ["PARTIAL-DATA-NEXT", ["https://example.db.org/"]]

An example of the sparse layout for multi-dimensional lists with three aggregated dimensions and values that are multidimensional lists of integers of arbitrary lengths:

.. code:: json

    {"optimade-partial-data": {"format": "1.2.0"}, "layout": "sparse"}

>     [3,5,19, [ [10,20,21], [30,40,50] ]

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    [3,5,19, [ [10,20,21], [30,40,50] ] ]
```

    [3,7,19, ["PARTIAL-DATA-REF", ["https://example.db.org/value2"]]]

>     [4,5,19, [ [11, 110], ["PARTIAL-DATA-REF", ["https://example.db.org/value3"]], [550, 333]]

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    [4,5,19, [ [11, 110], ["PARTIAL-DATA-REF", ["https://example.db.org/value3"]], [550, 333]]]
```

  The slice ends at the value with the given index (inclusive).
  If omitted, the end of the slice is the last index of the array.
- :field:`"step"`: Integer.
  The absolute difference in index between two subsequent values that are included in the slice.
  The default is 1, i.e., every value in the range indicated by :field:`start` and :field:`stop` is included in the slice.
  Hence, a value of 2 denotes a slice of every second value in the array.

For example, for the array :val:`["a", "b", "c", "d", "e", "f", "g", "h", "i", "j"]` the slice object :val:`{"start": 1, "end": 7, "step": 3}` refers to the items :val:`["b", "e", "h"]`.

Furthermore, we also define the following special markers:

- The *end-of-data-marker* is this exact JSON: :val:`["PARTIAL-DATA-END", [""]]`.
- A *reference-marker* is this exact JSON: :val:`["PARTIAL-DATA-REF", ["<url>"]]`, where :val:`"<url>"` is to be replaced with a URL being referenced.
- A *next-marker* is this exact JSON: :val:`["PARTIAL-DATA-NEXT", ["<url>"]]`, where :val:`"<url>"` is to be replaced with the target URL for the next link.

There is no requirement on the syntax or format of the URLs provided in these markers.

> The data provided via the URLs MUST be the JSON lines partial data format, i.e., the markers cannot be used to link to partial data provided in other formats.

Author: ```suggestion
When data is fetched from these URLs the response MUST be the JSON lines partial data format, i.e., the markers cannot be used to link to partial data provided in other formats.
```

> When data is fetched from these URLs the response MUST be the JSON lines partial data format, i.e., the markers cannot be used to link to partial data provided in other formats.

Author: ```suggestion
When data is fetched from these URLs the response MUST use the JSON lines partial data format, i.e., the markers cannot be used to link to partial data provided in other formats.
```

The markers have been deliberately designed to be valid JSON objects but *not* valid OPTIMADE property values.
Since the OPTIMADE list data type is defined as a list of values of the same data type or :val:`null`, the above markers cannot be encountered inside the actual data of an OPTIMADE property.

>   **Implementation note:** the recognizable string values for the markers should make it possible to prescreen the raw JSON text data lines for the reference-marker string to determine which lines that one can exclude from further processing to resolve references (alternatively, this screening can be done by the string parser used by the JSON parser).

Author: ```suggestion
  **Implementation note:** the recognizable string values for the markers should make it possible to prescreen the raw text for the JSON data lines for the reference-marker string to determine which lines that one can exclude from further processing to resolve references (alternatively, this screening can be done by the string parser used by the JSON parser).
```

>   **Implementation note:** the recognizable string values for the markers should make it possible to prescreen the raw text for the JSON data lines for the reference-marker string to determine which lines that one can exclude from further processing to resolve references (alternatively, this screening can be done by the string parser used by the JSON parser).

Author: ```suggestion
  **Implementation note:** the recognizable string values for the markers should make it possible to prescreen the raw text of the JSON data lines for the reference-marker string to determine which lines that one can exclude from further processing to resolve references (alternatively, this screening can be done by the string parser used by the JSON parser).
```

  The undelying design idea is that for lines that have reference-markers, the time it takes to process the data structure to locate the markers should be negliable compared to the time it takes to resolve and handle the large data they reference.
  Hence, the most relevant optimization is to avoid spending time processing data structures to find markers for lines where there are none.

The full response MUST be valid `JSON Lines <https://jsonlines.org/>`__ that adheres to the following format:

- The first line is a header object (defined below).
- The following lines are data lines adhering to the formats described below.
- The final line is either an end-of-data-marker (indicating that there is no more data to be given), or a next-marker indicating that more data is available, which can be obtained by retrieving data from the provided URL.

The first line MUST be a JSON object providing header information.
The header object MUST contain the keys:

- :field:`"optimade-partial-data"`: Object.

>   An object that identifying the response as being on OPTIMADE partial data format.

Author: ```suggestion
  An object identifying the response as being on OPTIMADE partial data format.
```

The following key is RECOMMENDED in the header object:

- :field:`"returned_ranges"`: Array of Object.
  For dense layout, and sparse layout of one dimensional list properties, the array contains a single element which is a `slice object`_ representing the range of data present in the response.
  In the specific case of a hierarchy of list properties represented as a sparse multi-dimensional array, if the field :field:`"returned_ranges"` is given, it MUST contain one slice object per dimension of the multi-dimensional array, representing slices for each dimension that cover the data given in the response.

The header object MAY also contain the keys:

- :field:`"property_name"`: String.
  The name of the property being provided.

- :field:`"entry"`: Object.
  An object that MUST have the following two keys:

  - :field:`"id"`: String.
    The id of the entry of the property being provided.

  - :field:`"type"`: String.
    The type of the entry of the property being provided.

- :field:`"has_references"`: Boolean.
  An optional boolean to indicate whether any of the data lines in the response contains a reference marker.

>   By including this field and giving it the value :val:`false`, a server MAY indicate that the client does not have to process any of the lines to detect reference markers.

Author: ```suggestion
  A value of :val:`false` means that the client does not have to process any of the lines to detect reference markers.
```

> - :field:`"links"`: Object.
> 
>   An object to provide relevant links for the property being provided.
>   It MAY contain the following key:

Author: ```suggestion
- :field:`"links"`: Object.
  An object to provide relevant links for the property being provided.
  It MAY contain the following key:
```

The header object MAY also contain the keys:

- :field:`"property_name"`: String.
  The name of the property being provided.

- :field:`"entry"`: Object.
  An object that MUST have the following two keys:

  - :field:`"id"`: String.
    The id of the entry of the property being provided.

  - :field:`"type"`: String.
    The type of the entry of the property being provided.

- :field:`"has_references"`: Boolean.
  An optional boolean to indicate whether any of the data lines in the response contains a reference marker.
  By including this field and giving it the value :val:`false`, a server MAY indicate that the client does not have to process any of the lines to detect reference markers.

- :field:`"links"`: Object.

  An object to provide relevant links for the property being provided.
  It MAY contain the following key:

  - :field:`base_url`: String.
    The base URL of the implementation serving the database to which this property belongs.

> 

Author: ```suggestion
```

  For dense layout, and sparse layout of one dimensional list properties, the array contains a single element which is a `slice object`_ representing the range of data present in the response.
  In the specific case of a hierarchy of list properties represented as a sparse multi-dimensional array, if the field :field:`"returned_ranges"` is given, it MUST contain one slice object per dimension of the multi-dimensional array, representing slices for each dimension that cover the data given in the response.

The header object MAY also contain the keys:

- :field:`"property_name"`: String.
  The name of the property being provided.

- :field:`"entry"`: Object.
  An object that MUST have the following two keys:

  - :field:`"id"`: String.
    The id of the entry of the property being provided.

  - :field:`"type"`: String.
    The type of the entry of the property being provided.

- :field:`"has_references"`: Boolean.
  An optional boolean to indicate whether any of the data lines in the response contains a reference marker.
  A value of :val:`false` means that the client does not have to process any of the lines to detect reference markers, which may speed up the parsing.

> - :field:`"links"`: Object.
>   An object to provide relevant links for the property being provided.
>   It MAY contain the following key:
> 
>   - :field:`base_url`: String.
>     The base URL of the implementation serving the database to which this property belongs.
> 
>   - :field:`"item_schema"`: String.
>     A URL to a JSON Schema that validates the data lines of the response.
>     The format SHOULD be the relevant partial extract of a valid property definition as described in `Property Definitions`_.
>     If a schema is provided, it MUST be a valid JSON schema using the same version of JSON schema as described in that section.
> 

Author: ```suggestion
- :field:`"item_schema"`: Object.
  An object that represents a JSON Schema that validates the data lines of the response.
  The format SHOULD be the relevant partial extract of a valid property definition as described in `Property Definitions`_.
  If a schema is provided, it MUST be a valid JSON schema using the same version of JSON schema as described in that section.

- :field:`"links"`: Object.
  An object to provide relevant links for the property being provided.
  It MAY contain the following key:

  - :field:`base_url`: String.
    The base URL of the implementation serving the database to which this property belongs.

  - :field:`"item_describedby"`: String.
    A URL to an external JSON Schema that validates the data lines of the response.
    The format and requirements on this schema are the same as for the inline schema field :field:`item_schema`.
```

Furthermore, we also define the following special markers:

- The *end-of-data-marker* is this exact JSON: :val:`["PARTIAL-DATA-END", [""]]`.
- A *reference-marker* is this exact JSON: :val:`["PARTIAL-DATA-REF", ["<url>"]]`, where :val:`"<url>"` is to be replaced with a URL being referenced.
  A reference-marker MUST only occur in a place where the property being communicated could have an embedded list.
- A *next-marker* is this exact JSON: :val:`["PARTIAL-DATA-NEXT", ["<url>"]]`, where :val:`"<url>"` is to be replaced with the target URL for the next link.

There is no requirement on the syntax or format of the URLs provided in these markers.
When data is fetched from these URLs the response MUST use the JSON lines partial data format, i.e., the markers cannot be used to link to partial data provided in other formats.
The markers have been deliberately designed to be valid JSON objects but *not* valid OPTIMADE property values.
Since the OPTIMADE list data type is defined as a list of values of the same data type or :val:`null`, the above markers cannot be encountered inside the actual data of an OPTIMADE property.

>   **Implementation note:** the recognizable string values for the markers should make it possible to prescreen the raw text of the JSON data lines for the reference-marker string to determine which lines that one can exclude from further processing to resolve references (alternatively, this screening can be done by the string parser used by the JSON parser).
>   The undelying design idea is that for lines that have reference-markers, the time it takes to process the data structure to locate the markers should be negliable compared to the time it takes to resolve and handle the large data they reference.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
  **Implementation note:** the recognizable string values for the markers should make it possible to prescreen the raw text of the JSON data lines for the reference-marker string to determine which are the lines that one can exclude from further processing to resolve references (alternatively, this screening can be done by the string parser used by the JSON parser).
  The undelying design idea is that for lines that have reference-markers, the time it takes to process the data structure to locate the markers should be negligible compared to the time it takes to resolve and handle the large data they reference.
```

The header object MAY also contain the keys:

- :field:`"property_name"`: String.
  The name of the property being provided.

- :field:`"entry"`: Object.
  An object that MUST have the following two keys:

  - :field:`"id"`: String.
    The id of the entry of the property being provided.

  - :field:`"type"`: String.
    The type of the entry of the property being provided.

- :field:`"has_references"`: Boolean.
  An optional boolean to indicate whether any of the data lines in the response contains a reference marker.
  A value of :val:`false` means that the client does not have to process any of the lines to detect reference markers, which may speed up the parsing.

- :field:`"item_schema"`: Object.
  An object that represents a JSON Schema that validates the data lines of the response.
  The format SHOULD be the relevant partial extract of a valid property definition as described in `Property Definitions`_.
  If a schema is provided, it MUST be a valid JSON schema using the same version of JSON schema as described in that section.

- :field:`"links"`: Object.
  An object to provide relevant links for the property being provided.
  It MAY contain the following key:

>   - :field:`base_url`: String.

Author: ```suggestion
  - :field:`"base_url"`: String.
```

>     The base URL of the implementation serving the database to which this property belongs.

Reviewer 4: Should we not mention here that this is a links object representing the base URL of the implementation, just like elsewhere in the specification ?

Author: This is a bit subtle, but the partial data format does very much not adhere to JSON:API. So IMO it would be strange to embed JSON:API objects in this format, so, I think we should let links just be URLs here.

Reviewer 4: Ok, that is fair.

- :field:`"returned_ranges"`: Array of Object.
  For dense data, and sparse data of one dimensional list properties, the array contains a single element which is a `slice object`_ representing the range of data present in the response.
  Once the client has encountered an end-of-data-marker, any data not covered by any of the encountered slices are to be assigned the value :val:`null`.

>   If the field :field:`"format"` is `"dense"` and :field:`"returned_ranges"` is omitted, then the client MUST assume that the data is a continuous range of data from the start of the array up to the number of elements given until reaching the end-of-data-marker or next-marker.
>   If :field:`"returned_ranges"` is included and the client encounters a next or end-of-data-marker before receiving all lines indicated by the slice, it should proceed by not assigning any values to those items, i.e., this is not an error.

Reviewer 5: Thanks @rartino, I was almost going to approve this PR, but I realized that there is a need of an additional clarification. We discussed that if we get to an end marker (not a next marker) and there were still values in the returned_ranges, this is the way for th server to communicate a guarantee that remaining values are null. I tried to rephrase. I provide a suggestion for this sentence below.

Moreover, we should also make an example later.
E.g. for a request on an array with start=0, step=2, end=12 (and let's say the array has 16 elements):
- first request returns start=0, step=2, end=12, and the following elements: 'a', 'b', 'c', NEXT
- second request returns start=6, step=2, end=12 and elements: 'd', END

Then the array should be considered as (where UNK indicates a values that was never requested by the client and is thus unknown to the client - another request would be needed if the client needs to know that value, even if typically if the client asks with a `step`, it probably does not need those UNK values):
```
['a', UNK, 'b', UNK, 'c', UNK, 'd', UNK, 'e', UNK, null, UNK, null, UNK, UNK, UNK]
```
So it's really clear that this is a way to provide a guarantee of nulls by the server.

```suggestion
  If the field :field:`"format"` is `"dense"` and :field:`"returned_ranges"` is omitted, then the client MUST assume that the data is a continuous range of data (possibly with a `step` between continuous indices) from the start of the array up to the number of elements given until reaching the end-of-data-marker or next-marker.
If :field:`"returned_ranges"` is included and the client encounters a next marker before receiving all lines indicated by the slice, it should proceed by not assigning any values to those items, i.e., this is not an error; the remaining values should be considered as yet unknown by thy client and they will be returned in the next request.
If :field:`"returned_ranges"` is included and the client encounters an end marker before receiving all lines indicated by the slice, it should assume that the remaining values in the slices are `null` in the server.
```

Author: Just before the quoted segment the text says: *"Once the client has encountered an end-of-data-marker, any data not covered by any of the encountered slices are to be assigned the value `null`."*

This, together with the fact that we did *not* impose requirement to serve the value in a strictly increasing index order - the server is technically allowed to first send, e.g., all even values: 0:100:2 and after the next link all odd values: 1:100:2.

So, my view is that the principle 'everything you did not get is `null`' covers all these cases and I'd rather not say anywhere else that values should be assumed or assigned to be `null` since that may be read to say that items from earlier pages may be overwritten with `null`.

I'm all for an edit that further clarifies all this, though.

Author: ```suggestion
  If the field :field:`"format"` is `"dense"` and :field:`"returned_ranges"` is omitted, then the client MUST assume that the data is a continuous range of data (possibly with a `step` between continuous indices) from the start of the array up to the number of elements given until reaching the end-of-data-marker or next-marker.
If :field:`"returned_ranges"` is included and the client encounters a next marker before receiving all lines indicated by the slice, it should proceed by not assigning any values to those items, i.e., this is not an error. Since the remaining values are not assigned a value, they will be :val:`null` if they are not assigned in another response retrieved via a next link encountered before the end-of-data-marker.
(Since there is no requirement that values are assigned in order between responses, it is possible the omitted values have already been assigned.
In that case they shall remain as assigned, i.e., they are not overwritten by :val:`null` in this situation.)
```
